Extending `securedrop.club`
===========================

After :ref:`getting started <getting_started>`, you may want to add some
host/service in `securedrop.club` :ref:`infrastructure <infrastructure>`.

Overview
--------

The `securedrop.club` infrastructure is developed and deployed using ansible.
The main playbook is `securedrop-club-playbook.yml`.

The development, tuning and corrections of the playbook is done in a separate
environment with automated testing. `Molecule <http://molecule.readthedocs.io>`_
helps in this job.

Each `major` playbook is related to a molecule `scenario`, i.e. an set of
hosts and a test playbook to get a minimal infrastructure setup allowing to
validate the service playbook. As an example, the weblate scenarios found in
`molecule/weblate/` define 4 hosts:

- a postfix master
- a bind server
- a monitoring server
- the weblate host

Then, the `weblate` scenario may be able to test weblate deployment, its
monitoring deployment, it ability to send emails, etc. and so on.

Some very horizontal playbooks are regrouped in the `misc` scenario.

The presence of a `bind-host` in most scenarios allows to spoof all records
from `securedrop.club` domain from an hermetic internal view (and could spoof
any other domain). By the way, this disallow external requests like e.g. ACME
challenge for TLS Certificates issuing. To overcome this limitation, the
domain of the scenario is defined in a one-time testing subdomain when a
`bind-host` is used by the scenario and the variable `with_fake_LE` has been
defined (meaning that we should use the "fake Let's Encrypt unlimited testing
infrastructure").

At the end of integration, the preprod scenario allows to deploy all
`securedrop.club`, in a testing subdomain.

Adding a host
-------------

Ansible hosts are defined in `inventory/01-hosts.yml`. By the way this file is
autogenerated by molecule' scenarios. Rather than adding a host you should add
a scenario.

Adding a scenario
-----------------

Copying files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

First we create directories:

::

 mkdir molecule/dummy molecule/dummy/roles molecule/dummy/tests

Then we select a scenario to derivate. The misc scenario is a good starting
point if you have no idea of which scenario choosing.

::

 cp -P molecule/misc/{create,destroy,molecule}.yml molecule/dummy/

Notice the `-P` option for preserving links. The files `create.yml` and
`destroy.yml` are linked to the infrastructure scenario.

Scenario definition
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Next, edit `molecule/dummy/molecule.yml`. You should at least:

- edit the scenario's name
  ::

   scenario:
     name: dummy

- define the included hosts.
  ::

    - name: dummy-host
      flavor: "s1-2"
    - name: external-host
      flavor: "s1-2"

De facto there is currently no indirection between hostnames and services:
`securedrop.club` infrastructure use `service`-host as naming convention. Then
each given host (e.g. postfix-host) is very attached to a given service
(e.g.  "infrastructure's mail relay").

So:

- if you need to choose a hostname, derive it from the service,

- by adding an already defined host, you will be able to deploy its (already
  defined) services.

The flavor refers to `OVH OpenStack provisionned ressources <https://docs.ovh.com/au/en/public-cloud/faq-how-to-understand-the-new-flavor-naming-rules-for-the-2017-range/>`_.

At this point you should be able to:

- create instances
  ::

   molecule create -s dummy
- log into instances
  ::

   molecule login -s dummy --host dummy
   molecule login -s dummy --host external
- destroy instances
  ::

   molecule destroy -s dummy

Adding playbooks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The molecule attended playbook is `molecule/dummy/playbook.yml`. It should
include all playbooks used for the scenario, i.e.:

- others scenarios playbooks, like `molecule/icinga/icinga-playbook.yml` or
  `molecule/postfix/postfix-playbook.yml`
- the `target` scenario playbook, here `molecule/icinga/dummy-playbook.yml`,
  which is intended to be included in   `securedrop-club-playbook.yml`. This
  playbook may possibly include children playbooks.
- possibly tests specific playbooks, prepended by `test`, like
  `molecule/icinga/test-dummy-playbook.yml`.

Once the playbooks added, you should be able to check its syntax and run it
on a created infrastructure, via

 ::

  molecule syntax -s dummy
  molecule converge -s dummy

Adding tests
^^^^^^^^^^^^

At this step, the purpose of the tests is mainly to detect that even if there
was no error, ansible has really deployed a functional service. See them as
`functionnal and non-regression testing` to maintaining our ansible base.

We use `testinfra <http://testinfra.readthedocs.io>`_ for this purpose. The
easiest way to get start with it is to look at some existing tests. For simple
testing see `molecule/bind/tests/test_external_bind.py`. For a
`request <http://docs.python-requests.org>`_
based test, see e.g. `molecule/weblate/tests/test_icingaweb.py`.

Since here you work in a dedicated scenario with separated resources, you can
do whatever you want (i.e. even some destructive action) as a test process.

Once it has been defined, you should be able to launch it with

 ::

  molecule verify -s dummy

By the way, testing is not monitoring. You are kindly invited to setup
monitoring for your services and to test via testinfra than monitoring has
been setup as you wish.

Finally, you can launch a destroy, create, converge, verify, destroy cycle by
launching

 ::

  molecule test -s dummy

Interaction with others scenarios
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Most services rely on bind, postfix and monitoring. To enable them you have to
add needed hosts in your molecule scenario and to include their playbook in your
scenario playbook.

You will also be interested by:

- `molecule/misc/sexy-debian-playbook.yml` for getting usefull tools,
- `molecule/certs/certs-playbook.yml` for getting usefull TLS certificates,
- `molecule/authorized_keys/authorized-keys-playbook.yml` for installing
  usefull keys,
- `molecule/misc/commit_etc-playbook.yml` for committing `/etc/` at the end of
  your playbook.


Documentation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You are kindly invited to document your scenario in `docs`.

Tweaking hosts
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can set ssh port, choose OS image and set default user by tweaking
`inventory/01-hosts.yml`.
